\chapter*{Abstract}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Abstract}

The cybersecurity landscape is in constant flux, with new attacks continuously
developed by threat actors to circumvent system defences. Consequently,
\gls{nids} deployed in practice are likely to encounter novel cyber threats,
i.e.\ unknown attacks. \gls{ml} exhibits great potential to detect such attacks
leveraging its capacity to model complex patterns without explicit developer
knowledge. Numerous machine learning techniques have been applied in the
literature in an effort to achieve this goal, however, many applications of
supervised techniques are presented as closed set classification problems
neglecting the critical aspect of detecting unknown attacks.

To address this gap, this study assesses and compares the efficacy of several
machine learning models in detecting both known and unknown attacks while
exploring the underlying relationships between different attack types to
facilitate generalisation. The study considers a range of algorithms from three
families of \gls{ml} techniques, namely, traditional supervised techniques,
traditional unsupervised techniques and deep unsupervised techniques.
Experiments are conducted on the CSE-CIC-IDS2018 dataset, often recognised as
the most realistic and up-to-date network intrusion detection dataset currently
available. This dataset, characterized by its diversity, scale and relevance to
real-world scenarios, provides a robust foundation for our experiments. This
research not only fills a crucial void in the existing literature by evaluating
\gls{ml} techniques on their ability to detect unknown cyber threats but also
contributes to advancing the understanding of how these techniques can
effectively be employed in practical cybersecurity applications.
