\chapter{Conclusion}%
\label{chp:conclusion}

In conclusion, cybersecurity is an ever-evolving landscape with new threats
constantly being developed.\ \gls{nids} are a crucial component to the defence
of any information system, analysing data and identifying attacks in real time.
Unknown attacks are a vital consideration when developing \gls{nids} as most
systems will encounter these attacks in practice and failure to detect such
attacks could lead to a security breach.\ \gls{ml} techniques offer tremendous
potential in this field due to their unique ability to identify complex
patterns unknown to the developer. This offers the potential to learn patterns
allowing for the detection of unknown attacks before these attacks are
discovered or perhaps even developed.

This potential has not gone unnoticed in the research community with numerous
papers proposing and exploring \gls{ml} techniques for \gls{nids}. Some of
these papers have achieved remarkable results demonstrating the efficacy of
\gls{ml} in this field. However, most of these works do not consider the impact
of unknown attacks when evaluating their models, creating a false sense of
security that may leave information systems vulnerable. In this study, we have
replicated four \gls{ml} models from two state-of-the-art works and evaluated
them using the methodology proposed by the work of Kus et al.~\cite{Kus}, which
has also been replicated.

This analysis has addressed our three primary objectives. We have analysed the
efficacy of current state-of-the-art techniques and discovered that they are
extremely effective on known attacks and on certain categories of unknown
attacks, however, some categories require prior knowledge to be classified
effectively. We have also compared the efficacies of supervised and
unsupervised techniques and discovered that supervised techniques are more
effective on known attacks overall as they do not struggle with any categories
unlike unsupervised techniques, which are ineffective against certain
categories. Unsupervised techniques, however, are unaffected by the prior
knowledge, or lack thereof, available on attacks. Supervised techniques, in
contrast, suffer a considerable decrease in efficacy without prior knowledge of
the attack. Finally, we have explored the relationships present between
individual attacks and attack categories in regard to generalisation. This
analysis has revealed an alarmingly low level of generalisation in supervised
models, even within attack categories in certain cases. This indicates these
supervised models may be more accurately placed in the category of \gls{sids}
than \gls{aids}. However, it should be noted that some level of generalisation
does take place, potentially offering an advantage over traditional \gls{sids}.
Furthermore, the specific algorithm employed has a significant effect on the
level of generalisation achieved.

Overall, these results should help to shed light on the efficacy and behaviour
of a variety of \gls{ml} techniques in the ever-evolving cyberthreat landscape
we face.

\section{Future Work}%
\label{sec:future}

Moving forward, work on integrating the benefits of both supervised and
unsupervised techniques could reveal new opportunities within the field. A
variety of techniques could be explored to combine the predictions generated
from both supervised and unsupervised classifiers which may be able to reap the
benefits of both approaches.

Additionally, other less conventional and novel techniques could be explored.
The models introduced at the end of Section~\ref{sec:literature}, for instance,
would serve as excellent candidates for a comparative analysis similar to this
one. These were not considered in this work due to time limitations and due to
the fact some of them were not published at the time of model selection.

Another important consideration is the feature set used. Most of the works
reviewed during the literature review, as well as this work itself use the
feature set provided by the original authors of the CSE-CIC-IDS2018 dataset.
The authors also made available the raw data captured during dataset
generation. Further research into extracting different features from this raw
data may unlock new opportunities within the field.

Finally, all the models considered in this work treat samples individually,
without considering neighbouring samples. Models that consider time series data
may be able to learn patterns present across several network flows originating
from the same attack, which may improve model performance. Future work could
consider such time series models in comparison to single sample models such as
those analysed in this work.